this video is brought to you by
curiosity stream give 31 days of
streaming completely free using the link
curiosity stream calm / feature history
or you can wait till the end to hear
more hello and welcome back to
featurette because you weren't expecting
that were you me to start a series and
actually continue it but based on the
reception to my last video on cars you
are all very very disappointed I didn't
talk about technicals and specifically
the Toyota Hilux so what better way to
make amends and do a whole video on
Toyotas highlighting the great Toyota
wall and then you guys can repay the
favor by helping me pay the bills
ya seek so to set the scene of the
toyota war we're going to have to set
the scene it's the 60s and africa has
just recently been split from its
European colonizers and with old great
changes in history it's accompanied by a
lot of violence all the new nations
we're finding their footing and civil
wars cooze and rebellions were
everywhere so it would be in 1969 at the
now notorious and now also dead dictator
Muammar Gaddafi would lead a coup in his
home of Libya Gaddafi came to power on
an agenda of Arab nationalism and it was
fundamental to him that he took a stand
for decolonization and also to secure
strategic resources and political assets
for his militaristic regime these
combined goals led to him pursuing claim
on the Alisal strip a section of land on
Libya's border with the former French
colony and currently civil war ridden
chat Gaddafi's intervention in these
southern neighbours affairs started with
him securing allegiance and supplying
rebel groups against Chad's
authoritarian president Francois Trimble
by however he was soon able to enter
negotiations and just straight up by the
al's our strip for 40 million pounds it
was a sizable area of land but it was
mostly desert with a small population
that was concentrated in the town of
Ozzie it's only attraction was it's
rumored uranium deposits but also its
annex
just served as a fantastic display of
Libyan prowess so for three straight
years Libya fair-and-square
owned the hours outstrip up until in
1975 Francoise humble buyer was
overthrown and the rebel groups
responsible were not fans of their
former dictators Libyan appeasement
Gaddafi would reopen hostilities and
continue his support for Libyan friendly
rebels against the new government across
a series of interventions by the Libyan
military directly and also a handful
from France and support of Chad a line
would be drawn in 1983 separating
government and rebel forces Libya was
left with virtual control of Northland
chat now the Libyan military far
outclassed the poorly equipped chatting
militias Libya was stocked with old
Soviet aircraft armor and artillery and
held control over the admittedly few
strategic Garrison's in the cherian
Sahara however by 1987 the Libyans had
lost the support of the local rebels and
so despite their resources the Libyan
defense consisted of isolated conscripts
with low morale the chatting in
government under the leadership of
hissène habré would be provided with 400
Toyota Hilux and Land Cruiser Utes ready
to be equipped with anti-tank guided
missiles light anti-air heavy machine
guns and so on the French had provided
the Chadians the unconventional weapons
as well as pledging air support all in
hopes seeing the Chadians reclaim the
north from Libya it may sound pretty
weird that Chad's international support
came in the form of civilian Toyota's
but improvising fighting vehicles wasn't
an unfounded tactic in fact stretching
the definition of a vehicle you can
point to first world war Russian to
chunker's as an early example
horse-drawn machine guns that were
perfect for hit-and-run combat on the
wide open Eastern Front the british
commonwealth iterated on that in the
Second World War when they armed light
jeeps with turrets for use of the long
range desert group we saw great success
in their North African raids the
historical tactic though Falls
part in tough mountainous and jungle
warfare which was the bulk of most post
Second World War conflicts that is up
until the 80s so the Chadians would make
the most of these Toyotas when they
opened the offensive against Libya by
striking the well fortified
communication base in Farah defended by
2,000 Libyans bolstered by armor and
artillery they were defeated by 5,000
men French air support and sort of
trusty Japanese Utes after the success
they moved fifth Libya's air strip
defended by even more armored artillery
air force and even a minefield French
air support for celebi insist stayed
grounded and the Chadians discovered
that when driving a hundred kilometers
an hour they didn't trigger the mines
and could roll straight up to the
airstrip another victory for the ragtag
army as soon as harbor has secured
northern chad in those few short months
he was ready to continue the initiative
and take back the alles airstrip now
that was against the French's wishes and
so now the Chadians moved without air
support they were able to take the town
of our Zell but when met with Libyan
counter-attacks before so abandon it
these Toyota tactics just wouldn't work
when it came to defending so in
September 2000 chatons drove across the
border into Libya blacked out under
moonlight concealing themselves in the
valleys and Hills they made their way
north of Libya's main air base but
Annelle saara garrisoned by 2500 men
over 70 tanks 30 APCs and around 30
aircraft the channing's were outnumbered
easily outgunned but their raid came as
such a surprise when they were spotted
coming from the north it was believed to
be reinforcements and by the time that
was realized they weren't they had
breached the airbase the cars were too
agile to be targeted accurately by
aircraft and were able to strafe and
down tanks were surprising efficiency
Libyan casualties were between 1,000 and
1,700 men all their vehicles were downed
and their air strips were torn up the
cherien's had lost 65 men in a few
Toyotas the Raiders left as soon as they
had arrived and
defeat was crushing to Gaddafi's and
military strongman image it was then the
dictator tried to save face and took a
conservatory outlook signing a ceasefire
and letting go of the hours our strip
back to Chad which was in his words his
gift Africa the Chadians underdog
victory hit headlines in the West and it
became known as the great Toyota war
however as we all know entering the 21st
century the use of Toyotas and other
four-wheel-drive Utes in war would
become very commonplace the Somali civil
war in the 90s saw the fall of their
national army and armored vehicles
became impossible to finance and run and
so the Warlord's and their factions
quickly took to creating what became
known as technicals using Toyotas and
other brands of four-wheel-drive Utes
they would be kidded out with all the
same guns used in the Chadians war these
cars became symbols of prestige for
militias and the same commander that had
beaten back the US at the Battle of
Mogadishu Mohammed Farah Aidid was
carried to his grave in the tray of a
Toyota Landcruiser and Somalia is the
reason we call these gun cars technicals
nongovernmental organizations working in
the country couldn't bring in their own
private security and so using technical
assistance grants hired local militias
for protection and these Somalis saw
security services just about always
around these vehicles as wars have
continued to spring up in the open
desert environments such as Iraq
Afghanistan and Syria the technicals
appeared more and more in Afghanistan
even the well-funded US Special Forces
took to using the vehicles for recon
operations so many non state militias
and weak armed forces employed the use
of technicals the Islamic state had made
a name for itself with this endless
convoys of langtry's the vehicles while
not armored and not designed for war are
designed perfectly for a budget their
speed allows them to avoid unfavorable
fights and respond quickly to where
they're needed they require no
specialized training to drive this
so much more fuel-efficient compared to
it tank and just about anyone with a
spanner two hands and one functional
brain can maintain them so it's given
all these reasons that they're now
iconic in 21st century conflict where
war is closely associated with desert
combat and militia fires and that's why
today even modern armies are beginning
to research and develop in hosting their
own fleets of technical like vehicles
Russia has begun production on its
domestically made you ways at Patriot
which is designed to drive like a Hilux
be reliable like a Hilux
and cost as much as a Hilux just without
the toyota badge and an interesting side
note to add it is such an advantage to
have you military rolling around on this
least fuel as possible especially when
all the fighting and destruction is
happening on the very oily you need to
fuel your car oil is important in war
it's important to politics and it's
important in me say going into this
sponsor the curiosity stream because on
curiosity stream I was able to watch an
old ABC documentary called crude which
tells you just about everything you'd
possibly want to know about oil and when
you're done watching about or if you
don't watch that I don't judge you can
check out the thousands of other
documentaries and originals on the
streaming service they cover history
science nature technology society and
more and whatever device you're watching
this video on you can also watch
curiosity stream so head over to
curiosity stream comm slash feature
history and get yourself that 31 day
trial and it's worth adding that not
only will a membership to curiosity
stream get you their service but it'll
also give you an account to nebula which
is also a streaming service that
features educational channels like
myself and hosts all our video libraries
as well as exclusive originals ad-free
so that's a two-for-one good one of that
so head into the description and you'll
find both those sites there and at least
one of them will pique your curiosity
I'm going to now thank the patrons
because I forgot to do that in the last
short video I did whoops sorry
and speaking of the patrons I want to
get around
to revamping the patreon soon because I
should be doing more with that
especially if I want to be able to do
more videos so watch out for maybe an
announcement video and if you don't give
a [__] about that I hope to put an
actual video out not too long from now
so you'll see me that tapper